---
title: 16. Greedy Algorithms
# description: Short summary of the post
date: 2024-12-07 16:04
categories: [Computer Science, Algorithm]
tags: [greedy-algorithm, activity-selection-problem]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
math: true
pin: false
---

A greedy algorithm always makes the choice that looks best at the moment.
It makes a locally optimal choice in the hope that this choice will lead to a globally optimal solution.

## 16.1 An activity-selection problem

Suppose we have a set $$ S = \{ a_1, \ a_2, \dots, \ a_n \} $$ of $$ n $$ proposed activities that wish to use a resource.
Each activity $$ a_i $$ has a start time $$ s_i $$ and a finish time $$ f_i $$, where $$ 0 \le s_i < f_i < \infty $$.
If selected, activity $$ a_i $$ takes place during the half-open time interval $$ [s_i, \ f_i) $$.
Activities $$ a_i $$ and $$ a_j $$ are compatible if the intervals $$ [s_i, \ f_i) $$ and $$ [s_j, \ f_j) $$ do not overlap.
In the activity-selection problem, we wish to select a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities.
Assume that the activities are sorted in monotonically increasing order of finish time:

$$
\begin{align*}
    f_1 \le f_2 \le \dots \le f_n
\end{align*}
\label{eq:1}
\tag{16.1}
$$

### The optimal substructure of the activity-selection problem

Denote by $$ S_{ij} $$ the set of activities that start after activity $$ a_i $$ finishes and that finish before activity $$ a_j $$ starts.
Suppose $$ A_{ij} $$ is a maximum set of mutually compatible activities in $$ S_{ij} $$, which includes some activity $$ a_k $$.
We assume that $$ a_k $$ is included in an optimal solution.
Let $$ A_{ik} = A_{ij} \cap S_{ik} $$ and $$ A_{kj} = A_{ij} \cap S_{kj} $$, then it turns out that $$ A_{ij} = A_{ik} \cup \{ a_k \} \cup A_{kj} $$.
Therefore, $$ A_{ij} $$ consists of $$ |A_{ij}| = |A_{ik}| + |A_{kj}| + 1 $$ activities.

The cut-and-paste argument shows that the optimal solution $$ A_{ij} $$ includes optimal solutions to the two subproblems for $$ S_{ik} $$ and $$ S_{kj} $$.
Suppose there is a set $$ A'_{kj} $$ of mutually compatible activities in $$ S_{kj} $$ where $$ |A'_{kj}| > |A_{kj}| $$, then $$ |A_{ik}| + |A'_{kj}| + 1 > |A_{ik}| + |A_{kj}| + 1 = |A_{ij}| $$ holds, which contradicts the assumption that $$ A_{ij} $$ is an optimal solution.
A symmetric argument applies to the activities in $$ S_{ik} $$.

This way of characterizing optimal substructure suggests that we might solve the activity-selection problem by dynamic programming.
Denote the size of an optimal solution for the set $$ S_{ij} $$ by $$ c[i, \ j] $$, then we would have the recurrence

$$
\begin{align*}
    c[i, \ j] =
    \begin{cases}
        \displaystyle 0                                                     & \text{if } S_{ij} = \emptyset \\
        \displaystyle \max_{a_k \in S_{ij}} \{ c[i, \ k] + c[k, \ j] + 1 \} & \text{if } S_{ij} \neq \emptyset
    \end{cases}
\end{align*}
\label{eq:2}
\tag{16.2}
$$

We could then develop a recursive algorithm and memoize it, or we could work bottom-up and fill in table entries as we go along.
However, we would be overlooking another important characteristic of the activity-selection problem.

### Making the greedy choice

Intuition suggest that we should choose an activity that leaves the resource available for as many other activities as possible.
Now, of the activities we end up choosing, one of them must be the first one to finish.
Therefore, we choose the activity in $$ S $$ with the earliest finish time, since that would leave the resource available for as many of the activities that follow it as possible.
Because the activities are sorted in monotonically increasing order by finish time, the greedy choice is activity $$ a_1 $$.

If we make the greedy choice, we have only one remaining subproblem to solve: finding activities that start after $$ a_1 $$ finishes.
We have that $$ s_1 < f_1 $$, and $$ f_1 $$ is the earliest finish time of any activity, and therefore no activity can have a finish time less than or equal to $$ s_1 $$.
Thus, all activities that are compatible with activity $$ a_1 $$ must start after $$ a_1 $$ finishes.  
Furthermore, we have already established that the activity-selection problem exhibits optimal substructure.
Let $$ S_k = \{ a_i \in S : s_i \ge f_k \} $$ be the set of activities that start after activity $$ a_k $$ finishes.
If we make the greedy choice of activity $$ a_1 $$, then $$ S_1 $$ remains as the only subproblem to solve.
(We sometimes refer to the sets $$ S_k $$ as subproblems rather than as just sets of activities.)
Optimal substructure tells us that if $$ a_1 $$ is in the optimal solution, then an optimal solution to the original problem consists of activity $$ a_1 $$ and all the activities in an optimal solution to the subproblem $$ S_1 $$.

### Theorem 16.1

Consider any nonempty subproblem $$ S_k $$, and let $$ a_m $$ be an activity in $$ S_k $$ with the earliest finish time.
Then $$ a_m $$ is included in some maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities of $$ S_k $$.

**Proof**  
Let $$ A_k $$ be a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities in $$ S_k $$, and let $$ a_j $$ be the activity in $$ A_k $$ with the earliest finish time.
If $$ a_j = a_m $$, we are done.
If $$ a_j \neq a_m $$, let the set $$ A'_k = A_k - \{ a_j \} \cup \{ a_m \} $$ be $$ A_k $$ but substituting $$ a_m $$ for $$ a_j $$.
The activities in $$ A'_k $$ are disjoint, which follows because the activities in $$ A_k $$ are disjoint, $$ a_j $$ is the first activity in $$ A_k $$ to finish, and $$ f_m \le f_j $$.
Since $$ |A'_k| = |A_k| $$, we conclude that $$ |A'_k| $$ is a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities of $$ S_k $$, and it includes $$ a_m $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

We can repeatedly choose the activity that finishes first, keep only the activities compatible with this activity, and repeat until no activities remain.
An algorithm to solve the activity-selection problem does not need to work bottom-up, like a table-based dynamic-programming algorithm.
Instead, it can work top-down, choosing an activity to put into the optimal solution and then solving the subproblem of choosing activities from those that are compatible with those already chosen.
Greedy algorithms typically have this top-down design: make a choice and then solve a subproblem, rather than the bottom-up technique of solving subproblems before making a choice.

### A recursive greedy algorithm

>RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR($$ s, \ f, \ k, \ n $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; $$ m = k + 1 $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; while $$ m \le n $$ and $$ s[m] < f[k] $$  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ m = m + 1 $$  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; if $$ m \le n $$  
>&nbsp;5&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;return $$ \{ a_m \} \ \cup $$ RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR($$ s, \ f, \ m, \ n $$)  
>&nbsp;6&nbsp; else return $$ \emptyset $$

In a given recursive call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR($$ s, \ f, \ k, \ n $$), the while loop of lines 2–3 looks for the first activity in $$ S_k $$ to finish.
The loop examines $$ a_{k + 1}, \ a_{k + 2}, \dots , \ a_{n} $$, until it finds the first activity $$ a_m $$ that is compatible with $$ a_k $$; such an activity has $$ s_m \ge f_k $$.
If the loop terminates because it finds such an activity, line 5 returns the union of $$ \{ a_m \} $$ and the maximum-size subset of $$ S_m $$ returned by the recursive call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR($$ s, \ f, \ m, \ n $$).
Alternatively, the loop may terminate because $$ m > n $$, in which case we have examined all activities in $$ S_k $$ without finding one that is compatible with $$ a_k $$.
In this case, $$ S_k = \emptyset $$, and so the procedure returns $$ \emptyset $$ in line 6.

Assuming that the activities have already been sorted by finish times, the running time of the call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR($$ s, \ f, \ 0, \ n $$) is $$ \Theta(n) $$, which we can see as follows.
Over all recursive calls, each activity is examined exactly once in the while loop test of line 2.
In particular, activity $$ a_i $$ is examined in the last call made in which $$ k < i $$.

### An iterative greedy algorithm

>GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR($$ s, \ f $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; $$ n = s.length $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; $$ A = \{ a_1 \} $$  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; $$ k = 1 $$  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; for $$ m = 2 $$ to $$ n $$  
>&nbsp;5&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ s[m] \ge f[k] $$  
>&nbsp;6&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ A = A \cup \{ a_m \} $$  
>&nbsp;7&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ k = m $$  
>&nbsp;8&nbsp; return $$ A $$