---
title: 22. Elementary Graph Algorithms
# description: Short summary of the post
date: 2024-12-14 16:52
categories: [Computer Science, Algorithm]
tags: [graph-algorithm, bfs, dfs, topological-sort, scc]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
math: true
pin: false
---

## 22.1 Representations of graphs

We can choose between two standard ways to represent a graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$: as a collection of adjacency lists or as an adjacency matrix.
Adjacency-list representation provides a compact way to represent sparse graphs $$ \left( |E| \ll |V|^2 \right) $$.
Adjacency-matrix representation is more preferred when the graph is dense $$ \left( |E| \approx |V|^2 \right) $$ or when we need to tell quickly if there is an edge connecting two given vertices.

The adjacency-list representation of a graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ consists of an array $$ Adj $$ of $$ |V| $$ lists, one for each vertex in $$ V $$.
For each $$ u \in V $$, the adjacency list $$ Adj[u] $$ contains all the vertices $$ v $$ such that there is an edge $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$.
If $$ G $$ is a directed graph, the sum of the lenghts of all the adjacency lists is $$ |E| $$.
If $$ G $$ is an undirected graph, the sum of the lenghts of all the adjacency lists is $$ 2|E| $$.
For both directed and undirected graphs, the adjacency-list representation requires $$ \Theta (V + E) $$ amount of memory.

Adjacency lists can represent weighted graphs, that is, graphs for which each edge has an associated weight, typically given by a weight function $$ w : E \rightarrow \mathbb{R} $$.
We can simply store the weight $$ w(u, \ v) $$ of the edge $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$ with vertex $$ v $$ in $$ u $$'s adjacency list.
A potential disadvantage of the adjacency-list representation is that it provides no quicker way to determine whether a given edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ is present in the graph than to search for $$ v $$ in the adjacency list $$ Adj[u] $$.

The adjacency-matrix representation of a graph $$ G $$ consists of a
$$ |V| \times |V| $$
matrix $$ A = (a_{ij}) $$ such that

$$
\begin{align*}
    a_{ij} = 
    \begin{cases}
        1 & \text{if } (i, \ j) \in E \\
        0 & \text{otherwise}
    \end{cases}
\end{align*}
$$

The adjacency-matrix of a graph requires $$ \Theta \left( V^2 \right) $$ memory, independent of the number of edges in the graph.
Since in an undirected graph, $$ (u, \ v) $$ and $$ (v, \ u) $$ represent the same edge, the adjacency matrix $$ A $$ of an undirected graph is its own transpose: $$ A = A^\text{T} $$.
Like adjacency lists, adjacency matrices can represent weighted graphs.
If $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ is a weighted graph with edge-weight function $$ w $$, we can simply store the weight $$ w(u, \ v) $$ of the edge $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$ as the entry in row $$ u $$ and column $$ v $$ of the adjacency matrix.

## 22.2 Breadth-first search

Breadth-first search is one of the simplest algorithms for searching a graph and the archetype for many important graph algorithms.
Given a graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ and a source vertex $$ s $$, breadth-first search explores the edges of $$ G $$ to discover every vertex that is reachable from $$ s $$.
It computes the distance (smallest number of edges) from $$ s $$ to each reachable vertex.
Breadth-first search expands the frontier between discovered and undiscovered vertices uniformly across the breadth of the frontier.
That is, the algorithm discovers all vertices at distance $$ k $$ from $$ s $$ before discovering any vertices at distance $$ k + 1 $$.
The algorithm works on both directed and undirected graphs.

To keep track of progress, breadth-first search colors each vertex white, gray, or black.
All vertices start out white and become gray and then black after they are discovered.
It also produces a breadth-first tree with root $$ s $$ that contains all reachable vertex.
Whenever the search discovers a white vertex $$ v $$ in the course of scanning the adjacency list of an already discovered vertex $$ u $$, the vertex $$ v $$ and the edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ are added to the tree.
We say that $$ u $$ is the predecessor or parent of $$ v $$ in the breadth-first tree.
For any vertex $$ v $$ reachable from $$ s $$, the simple path in the breadth-first tree from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ corresponds to a shortest path (a path containing the smallest number of edges) from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ in $$ G $$.

>BFS($$ G, \ s $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; for each vertex $$ u \in G.V - \{ s \} $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ u.color = $$ WHITE  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ u.d = \infty $$  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ u.\pi = $$ NIL  
>&nbsp;5&nbsp; $$ s.color = $$ GRAY  
>&nbsp;6&nbsp; $$ s.d = 0 $$  
>&nbsp;7&nbsp; $$ Q = \emptyset $$  
>&nbsp;8&nbsp; ENQUEUE($$ Q, \ s $$)  
>&nbsp;9&nbsp; while $$ Q \neq \emptyset $$  
>10&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ u = $$ DEQUEUE($$ Q $$)  
>11&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;for each $$ v \in G.Adj[u] $$  
>12&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ v.color == $$ WHITE  
>13&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ v.color = $$ GRAY  
>14&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ v.d = u.d + 1 $$  
>15&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ v.\pi = u $$  
>16&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ENQUEUE($$ Q, \ v $$)  
>17&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$u.color = $$ BLACK

The procedure BFS works as follows.
Lines 1–4 paint every vertex white, set $$ u.d $$ to be infinity for each vertex $$ u $$, and set the parent of every vertex to be NIL except the source vertex $$ s $$.
Lines 5–7 paint $$ s $$ gray, initialize $$ s.d $$ as $$ 0 $$, set the predecessor of the source to be NIL.
Lines 8–9 initilize $$ Q $$ to the queue containing just the vertex $$ s $$.

The while loop of lines 10–18 iterates as long as there remain gray vertices, which are discovered vertices that have not yet had their adjacency lists fully examined.
This while loop maintains the following invariant:

>At the test in line 10, the queue $$ Q $$ consists of the set of gray vertices.

Prior to the first iteration, the only gray vertex, and the only vertex in $$ Q $$, is the source vertex $$ s $$.
Line 11 determines the gray vertex $$ u $$ at the head of the queue $$ Q $$ and removes it from $$ Q $$.
The for loop of lines 12–17 considers each vertex $$ v $$ in the adjacency list of $$ u $$.
If $$ v $$ is white, then it has not yet been discovered, and the procedure discovers it by executing lines 14–17.
The procedure paints vertex $$ v $$ gray, sets its distance $$ v.d $$ to $$ u.d + 1 $$, records $$ u $$ as its parent $$ v.\pi $$, and places it at the tail of the queue $$ Q $$.
Once the procedure has examined all the vertices on $$ u $$'s adjacency list, it blackens $$ u $$ in line 18.

The results of breadth-first search depend upon the order in which the neighbors of a given vertex are visited in line 12.
The breadth-first tree may vary, but the distances $$ d $$ computed by the algorithm will not.

### Analysis

By using aggregate analysis, the total running time of the breadth-first search algorithm can be calculated.
The test in line 13 ensures that each vertex is enqueued at most once, and hence dequeued at most once.
The operations of enqueuing and dequeuing take $$ O(1) $$ time, so the total time devoted to queue operations is $$ O(V) $$.
Because the procedure scans the adjacency list of each vertex only when the vertex is dequeued, it scans each adjacency list at most once.
Since the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency lists is $$ \Theta(E) $$, the total time spent in scanning adjacency lists is $$ O(E) $$.
The overhead for initialization is $$ O(V) $$, and thus the total running time of the BFS procedure is $$ O(V + E) $$.

### Shortest paths

Define the shortest-path distance $$ \delta(s, \ v) $$ from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ as the minimum number of edges in any path from vertex $$ s $$ to vertex $$ v $$.
If there is no path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$, then $$ \delta(s, \ v) = \infty $$.

### Lemma 22.1

Let $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ be a directed or undirected graph, and let $$ s \in V $$ be an arbitrary vertex.
Then, for any edge $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$, $$ \delta(s, \ v) \le \delta(s, \ u) + 1 $$.

**Proof**  
If $$ u $$ is reachable from $$ s $$, then so is $$ v $$.
In this case, the shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ cannot be longer than the shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ u $$ followed by the edge $$ (u, \ v) $$.
If $$ u $$ is not reachable from $$ s $$, then $$ \delta(s, \ u) = \infty $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Lemma 22.2

Let $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is run on $$ G $$ from a given source vertex $$ s \in V $$.
Then upon termination, for each vertex $$ v \in V $$, $$ v.d \ge \delta(s, \ v) $$.

**Proof**  
We use induction on the number of ENQUEUE operation.
The inductive hypothesis is that $$ v.d \ge \delta(s, \ v) $$ for all $$ v \in V $$.
When $$ s $$ is enqueued in $$ Q $$ in line 9, the inductive hypothesis holds since $$ s.d = 0 = \delta(s, \ s) $$ and $$ v.d = \infty \ge \delta(s, \ v) $$ for all $$ v \in V - \{ s \} $$.  
For the inductive step, consider a white vertex $$ v $$ that is discovered during the search from a vertex $$ u $$.
The inductive hypothesis implies that $$ u.d \ge \delta(s, \ u) $$.
From line 15 and Lemma 22.1, we obtain

$$
\begin{align*}
    v.d = u.d + 1 \ge \delta(s, \ u) + 1 \ge \delta(s, \ v)
\end{align*}
$$

Vertex $$ v $$ is once enqueued in line 17 and never enqueued again; the value of $$ v.d $$ does not change after it is determined.
Therefore, the inductive hypothesis is maintained. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Lemma 22.3

Suppose that during the execution of BFS on a graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$, the queue $$ Q $$ contains the vertices $$\langle v_1, \ v_2, \dots, \ v_r \rangle $$, where $$ v_1 $$ is the head of $$ Q $$ and $$ v_r $$ is the tail.
Then, $$ v_{r}.d \le v_{1}.d + 1  $$ and $$ v_{i}.d \le v_{i + 1}.d $$ for $$ i = 1, \ 2, \dots , r - 1 $$.

**Proof**  
The proof is by induction on the number of queue operations.
Initially, when the queue contains only $$ s $$, the lemma holds.  
For the inductive step, we must prove that the lemma holds after both dequeuing and enqueuing a vertex.
If the head $$ v_1 $$ of the queue is dequeued, $$ v_2 $$ becomes the new head.
(If the queue becomes empty, then the lemma holds vacuously.)
By the inductive hypothesis, $$ v_{1}.d \le v_{2}.d $$, but then we have $$ v_{r}.d \le v_{1}.d + 1 \le v_{2}.d + 1 $$.
Thus, the remaining inequalities are unaffected.  
When a vertex $$ v $$ is enqueued in line 17, it becomes $$ v_{r + 1} $$.
At that time, we have already removed vertex $$ u $$, whose adjacency list is currently being scanned, from the queue $$ Q $$.
By the inductive hypothesis, the new head $$ v_1 $$ has $$ v_{1}.d \ge u.d $$.
Thus, $$ v_{r + 1}.d = v.d = u.d + 1 \le v_{1}.d + 1 $$.
From the inductive hypothesis, we also have $$ v_{r}.d \le u.d + 1 $$, and so $$ v_{r}.d \le u.d + 1 = v.d = v_{r + 1}.d $$, and the remaining inequalities are unaffected.
Therefore, the lemma follows when $$ v $$ is enqueued. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Corollary 22.4

Suppose that vertices $$ v_i $$ and $$ v_j $$ are enqueued during the execution of BFS, and that $$ v_i $$ is enqueued before $$ v_j $$. Then $$ v_{i}.d \le v_{j}.d $$ at the time that $$ v_j $$ is enqueued.

**Proof**  
Immediate from Lemma 22.3 and the property that each vertex receives a finite $$ d $$ value at most once during the course of BFS. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Theorem 22.5 (Correctness of breadth-first search)

Let $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is run on $$ G $$ from a given source vertex $$ s \in V $$.
Then, during its execution, BFS discovers every vertex $$ v \in V $$ that is reachable from the source $$ s $$, and upon termination, $$ v.d = \delta(s, \ v) $$ for all $$ v \in V $$.
Moreover, for any vertex $$ v \neq s $$ that is reachable from $$ s $$, one of the shortest paths from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ is a shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v.\pi $$ followed by the edge $$ (v.\pi, \ v) $$.

**Proof**  
Assume that some vertex receives a $$ d $$ value not equal to its shortest-path distance.
Let $$ v $$ be the vertex with minimum $$ \delta(s, \ v) $$ that receives such an incorrect $$ d $$ value.
Clearly, $$ v \neq s $$.
By Lemma 22.2, $$ v.d \ge \delta(s, \ v) $$.
Vertex $$ v $$ must be reachable from $$ s $$, for if is not, then $$ \delta(s, \ v) = \infty \ge v.d $$.  
Let $$ u $$ be the vertex immediately preceding $$ v $$ on a shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$, so that $$ \delta(s, \ v) = \delta(s, \ u) + 1 $$.
Because $$ \delta(s, \ u) < \delta(s, \ v) $$, and because of how we chose $$ v $$, we have $$ u.d = \delta(s, \ u) $$.
Putting these properties together, we have

$$
\begin{align*}
    v.d > \delta(s, \ v) = \delta(s, \ u) + 1 = u.d + 1
\end{align*}
\label{eq:1}
\tag{22.1}
$$

Now consider the time when BFS chooses to dequeue vertex $$ u $$ from $$ Q $$ in line 11.
At this time, vertex $$ v $$ is either white, gray, or black.
In each of these cases, we derive a contradiction to inequality \eqref{eq:1}.  
If $$ v $$ is white, then line 15 sets $$ v.d = u.d + 1 $$, contradicting \eqref{eq:1}.  
If $$ v $$ is black, then it was already removed from the queue and, by Corollary 22.4, we have $$ v.d \le u.d $$, again contradicting \eqref{eq:1}.  
If $$ v $$ is gray, then it was painted gray upon dequeuing some vertex $$ w $$, which was removed from $$ Q $$ earlier than $$ u $$ and for which $$ v.d = w.d + 1 $$.
By Corollary 22.4, however, $$ w.d \le u.d $$, and so we have $$ v.d = w.d + 1 \le u.d + 1 $$, once again contradicting \eqref{eq:1}.  
Thus we conclude that $$ v.d = \delta(s, \ v) $$ for all $$ v \in V $$.
All vertices $$ v $$ reachable from $$ s $$ must be discovered, for otherwise they would have $$ \infty = v.d > \delta(s, \ v) $$.
Observe that if $$ v.\pi = u $$, then $$ v.d = u.d + 1 $$.
Therefore, we can obtain a shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ by taking a shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v.\pi $$ and then traversing the edge $$ (v.\pi, \ v) $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Breadth-first trees

The procedure BFS builds a breadth-first tree as it searches the graph.
For a graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ with source $$ s $$, we define the predecessor subgraph of $$ G $$ as $$ G_\pi = (V_\pi, \ E_\pi) $$, where $$ V_\pi = \{ v \in V : v.\pi \neq \text{NIL} \} \cup \{ s \}$$ and $$ E_\pi = \{ (v.\pi \ v) : v \in V_\pi - \{ s \} \} $$
The predecessor subgraph $$ G_\pi $$ is a breadth-first tree if $$ V_\pi $$ consists of the vertices reachable from $$ s $$ and, for all $$ v \in V_\pi $$, the subgraph $$ G_\pi $$ contains a unique simple path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ that is also a shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$ in $$ G $$.
The edges in $$ E_\pi $$ are called tree edges.

### Lemma 22.6

When applied to a directed or undirected graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$, procedure BFS constructs $$ \pi $$ so that the predecessor subgraph $$ G_\pi = (V_\pi, \ E_\pi) $$ is a breadth-first tree.

**Proof**  
Line 16 of BFS sets $$ v.\pi = u $$ if and only if $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$ and $$ v $$ is reachable from $$ s $$.
Thus $$ V_\pi $$ consists of the vertices in $$ V $$ reachable from $$ s $$.
Since $$ G_\pi $$ forms a tree, by Theorem B.2, it contains a unique simple path from $$ s $$ to each vertex in $$ V_\pi $$.
By applying Theorem 22.5 inductively, we conclude that every such path is a shortest path in $$ G $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

The following procedure prints out the vertices on a shortest path from $$ s $$ to $$ v $$, assuming that BFS has already computed a breadth-first tree:

>PRINT-PATH($$ G, \ s, \ v $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; if $$ v == s $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;print $$ s $$  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; elseif $$ v.\pi == $$ NIL  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;print "no path from" $$ s $$ "to" $$ v $$ "exists"  
>&nbsp;5&nbsp; else PRINT-PATH($$ G, \ s, \ v.\pi $$)  
>&nbsp;6&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;print $$ v $$

This procedure runs in time linear in the number of vertices in the path printed, since each recursive call is for a path one vertex shorter.

## 22.3 Depth-first search

Depth-first search explores edges out of the most recently discovered vertex $$ v $$ that still has unexplored edges leaving it.
Once all of $$ v $$'s edges have been explored, the search backtracks to explore edges leaving the vertex from which $$ v $$ was discovered.
This process continues until we have discovered all the vertices that are reachable from the original source vertex.
If any undiscovered vertices remain, then depth-first search selects one of them as a new source, and it repeats the search from that source.

The algorithm repeats this entire process until it has discovered every vertex. It may seem arbitrary that breadth-first search is limited to only one source whereas depth-first search may search from multiple sources.
Although conceptually, breadth-first search could proceed from multiple sources and depth-first search could be limited to one source, the way they are described reflects how the results of these searches are typically used.
Breadth-first search usually serves to find shortest-path distances from a given source, while depth-first search is often a subroutine in another algorithm.

Unlike breadth-first search, the predecessor subgraph produced by a depth-first search may be composed of several trees, because the search may repeat from multiple sources.
Therefore, the predecessor subgraph of a depth-first search is defined differently from that of a breath-first search: we let $$ G_\pi = (V, \ E_\pi) $$, where $$ E_\pi = \{ (v.\pi, \ v) : v \in V \land v.\pi \neq \text{NIL} \} $$.
The predecessor subgraph of a depth-first search forms a depth-first forest comprising several depth-first trees.
The edges in $$ E_\pi $$ are tree edges.

As in breadth-first search, depth-first search colors vertices during the search to indicate their state.
Each vertex is initially white, is grayed when it is discovered in the search, and is blackened when it is finished.
(Its adjacency list has been examined completely.)
Each vertex ends up in exactly one depth-first tree, so these trees are disjoint.

For every vertex $$ u $$,

$$
\begin{align*}
    u.d < u.f
\end{align*}
\label{eq:2}
\tag{22.2}
$$

Vertex $$ u $$ is white before time $$ u.d $$, gray between $$ u.d $$ and $$ u.f $$, and black thereafter.

>DFS($$ G $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; for each vertex $$ u \in G.V $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ u.color = $$ WHITE  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ u.\pi = $$ NIL  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; $$ time = 0 $$  
>&nbsp;5&nbsp; for each vertex $$ u \in G.V $$  
>&nbsp;6&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ v.color = $$ WHITE  
>&nbsp;7&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DFS-VISIT($$ G, \ u $$)

>DFS-VISIT($$ G, \ u $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; $$ time = time + 1 $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; $$ u.d = time $$  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; $$ u.color = $$ GRAY  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; for each $$ v \in G.Adj[u] $$  
>&nbsp;5&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ v.color = $$ WHITE  
>&nbsp;6&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ v.\pi = u $$  
>&nbsp;7&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DFS-VISIT($$ G, \ v $$)  
>&nbsp;8&nbsp; $$u.color = $$ BLACK  
>&nbsp;9&nbsp; $$ time = time + 1 $$  
>10&nbsp; $$ u.f = time $$

Procedure DFS works as follows.
Lines 1–3 paint all vertices white and initialize their $$ \pi $$ attributes to NIL.
Line 4 resets the global $$ time $$ counter.
Lines 5–7 check each vertex in $$ V $$ in turn and, when a white vertex is found, visit it using DFS-VISIT.
Every time DFS-VISIT ($$ G, \ u $$) is called in line 7, vertex $$ u $$ becomes the root of a new tree in the depth-first forest.
When DFS returns, every vertex $$ u $$ has been assigned a discovery time $$ u.d $$ and a finishing time $$ u.f $$.  
In each call DFS-VISIT($$ G, \ u $$), vertex $$ u $$ is initially white.
Line 1 increments the global variable $$ time $$.
Line 2 records the new value of $$ time $$ as the discovery time $$ u.d $$, and line 3 paints $$ u $$ gray.
Lines 4–7 examine each vertex $$ v $$ adjacent to $$ u $$ and recursively visit $$ v $$ if it is white.
Finally, after every edge leaving $$ u $$ has been explored, lines 8–10 paint $$ u $$ black, increment $$ time $$, and record the finishing time in $$ u.f $$.
Note that the results of depth-first search depend upon the order in which line 5 of DFS examines the vertices and upon the order in which line 4 of DFS-VISIT visits the neighbors of a vertex.

As we did for breadth-first search, we use aggregate analysis to calculate the running time of DFS.
The loops on lines 1–3 and lines 5–7 of DFS take time $$ \Theta(V) $$, exclusive of the time to execute the calls to DFS-VISIT.
The procedure DFS-VISIT is called exactly once for each vertex $$ u \in V $$.
During an execution of DFS-VISIT($$ G, \ V $$), the loop on lines 4–7 executes $$ |Adj[v]| $$ times.
Since

$$
    \begin{align*}
        \sum_{ v \in V } |Adj[v]| = \Theta(E)
    \end{align*}
$$,

the total cost of executing lines 4–7 of DFS-VISIT is $$ \Theta(E) $$.
The running time of DFS is therefore $$ \Theta(V + E) $$.

### Properties of depth-first search

The predecessor subgraph $$ G_\pi $$ forms a forest of trees, since the structure of the depth-first trees exactly mirrors the structure of recursive calls of DFS-VISIT.
That is, $$ u = v.\pi $$ if and only if DFS-VISIT($$ G, \ v $$) was called during a search of $$ u $$'s adjacency list.
Additionally, vertex $$ v $$ is a descendant of vertex $$ u $$ in the depth-first forest if and only if $$ v $$ is discovered during the time in which $$ u $$ is gray.

Another important property of depth-first search is that discovery and finishing times have parenthesis structure.

### Theorem 22.7 (Parenthesis theorem)

In any depth-first search of a directed or an undirected graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$, for any two vertices $$ u $$ and $$ v $$, exactly one of the following three conditions holds.
- The intervals $$ [u.d, \ u.f] $$ and $$ [v.d, \ v.f] $$ are entirely disjoint, and neither $$ u $$ nor $$ v $$ is a descendant of the other in the depth-first forest.
- The interval $$ [u.d, \ u.f] $$ is contained entirely within the interval $$ [v.d, \ v.f] $$, and $$ u $$ is a descendant of $$ v $$ in a depth-first tree.
- The interval $$ [v.d, \ v.f] $$ is contained entirely within the interval $$ [u.d, \ u.f] $$, and $$ v $$ is a descendant of $$ u $$ in a depth-first tree.

**Proof**  
WLOG $$ u.d < v.d $$.
When $$ v.d < u.f $$, $$ v $$ was discovered while $$ u $$ was still gray, which implies that $$ v $$ is a descendant of $$ u $$.
Since $$ v $$ was discovered more recently than $$ u $$, all of its outgoing edges are explored, and $$ v $$ is finished, before the search returns to and finishes $$ u $$.
In this case, therefore, the interval $$ [v.d, \ v.f] $$ is entirely contained within the interval $$ [u.d, \ u.f] $$.
When $$ u.f < v.d $$, by inequality \eqref{eq:2}, $$ u.d < u.f < v.d < v.f $$; thus the intervals $$ [u.d, \ u.f] $$ and $$ [v.d, \ v.f] $$ are disjoint.
Because the intervals are disjoint, neither vertex was discovered while the other was gray, and so neither vertex is a descendant of the other. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Corollary 22.8 (Nesting of descendants' intervals)

Vertex $$ v $$ is a proper descendant of vertex $$ u $$ in the depth-first forest for a (directed or undirected) graph $$ G $$ if and only if $$ u.d < v.d < v.f < u.f $$.

**Proof**  
Immediate from Theorem 22.7.

### Theorem 22.9 (White-path theorem)

In a depth-first forest of a (directed or undirected) graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$, vertex $$ v $$ is a descendant of vertex $$ u $$ if and only if at the time $$ u.d $$ that the search discovers $$ u $$, there is a path from $$ u $$ to $$ v $$ consisting entirely of white vertices.

**Proof**  
$$ \Rightarrow $$: If $$ v = u $$, then the path from $$ u $$ to $$ v $$ contains just vertex $$ u $$, which is still white when we set the value of $$ u.d $$.
Now, suppose that $$ v $$ is a proper descendant of $$ u $$ in the depth-first forest.
By Corollary 22.8, $$ u.d < v.d $$, and so $$ v $$ is white at time $$ u.d $$.
Since $$ v $$ can be any descendant of $$ u $$, all vertices on the unique simple path from $$ u $$ to $$ v $$ in the depth-first forest are white at time $$ u.d $$.  
$$ \Leftarrow $$: Suppose that there is a path of white vertices from $$ u $$ to $$ v $$ at time $$ u.d $$, but $$ v $$ does not become a descendant of $$ u $$ in the depth-first tree.
WLOG assume that every vertex other than $$ v $$ along the path becomes a descendant of $$ u $$.
(Otherwise, let $$ v $$ be the closest vertex to $$ u $$ along the path that doesn't become a descendant of $$ u $$.)
Let $$ w $$ be the predecessor of $$ v $$ in the path, so that $$ w $$ is a descendant of $$ u $$.
By Corollary 22.8, $$ w.f \le u.f $$.
Because $$ v $$ must be discovered after $$ u $$ is discovered, but before $$ w $$ is finished, we have $$ u.d < v.d < w.f \le u.f $$.
Theorem 22.7 then implies that the interval $$ [v.d, \ v.f] $$ is contained entirely within the interval $$ [u.d, \ u.f] $$.
By Corollary 22.8, $$ v $$ must after all be a descendant of $$ u $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Classification of edges

There are four edge types in terms of the depth-first forest $$ G_\pi $$ produced by a depth-first search on $$ G $$:

1. Tree edges are edges in the depth-first forest $$ G_\pi $$.
Edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ is a tree edge if $$ v $$ was discovered by exploring edge $$ (u, \ v) $$.
2. Back edges are those edges $$ (u, \ v) $$ connecting a vertex $$ u $$ to an ancestor $$ v $$ in a depth-first tree.
Self-loops are also considered as back edges.
3. Forward edges are those nontree edges $$ (u, \ v) $$ connecting a vertex $$ u $$ to a descendant $$ v $$ in a depth-first tree.
4. Cross edges are all other edges.
They can go between vertices in the same depth-first tree, as long as one vertex is not an ancestor of the other, or they can go between vertices in different depth-first trees.

The DFS algorithm has enough information to classify some edges as it encounters them.
When we first explore an edge $$ (u, \ v) $$, the color of vertex $$ v $$ tells us something about the edge:

1. WHITE indicates a tree edge,
2. GRAY indicates a back edge, and
3. BLACK indicates a forward or cross edge.

The first case is immediate from the specification of the algorithm.
For the second case, observe that the gray vertices always form a linear chain of descendants corresponding to the stack of active DFS-VISIT invocations; the number of gray vertices is one more that the depth in the depth-first forest of the vertex most recently discovered.
Exploration always proceeds from the deepest gray vertex, so an edge that reaches another gray vertex has reached an ancestor.
The third case handles the remaining possibility; an edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ is a forward edge if $$ u.d < v.d $$ and a cross edge if $$ u.d > v.d $$.  
In the case of an undirected graph, we classify the edge as the first type in the classification list that applies.
Equivalently, we classify the edge according to whichever of $$ (u, \ v) $$ or $$ (v, \ u) $$ the search encounters first.

### Theorem 22.10

In a depth-first search of an undirected graph $$ G $$, every edge of $$ G $$ is either a tree edge or a back edge.

**Proof**  
Let $$ (u, \ v) $$ be an arbitrary edge of $$ G $$, and suppose WLOG $$ u.d < v.d $$.
Then the search must discover and finish $$ v $$ before it finishes $$ u $$, since $$ v $$ is on $$ u $$'s adjacency list.
If the first time that the search explores edge $$ (u, \ v) $$, it is in the direction from $$ u $$ to $$ v $$, then $$ v $$ is undiscovered until that time, for otherwise the search would have explored this edge already in the direction from $$ v $$ to $$ u $$.
Thus, $$ (u, \ v) $$ becomes a tree edge.
If the search explores $$ (u, \ v) $$ first in the direction from $$ v $$ to $$ u $$, then $$ (u, \ v) $$ is a back edge, since $$ u $$ is still gray at the time the edge is first explored. $$ \blacksquare $$

## 22.4 Topological sort

A topological sort of a dag (directed acyclic graph) $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ is a linear ordering of all its vertices such that if $$ G $$ contains an edge $$ (u, \ v) $$, then $$ u $$ appears before $$ v $$ in the ordering.
If the graph contains a cycle, then no linear ordering is possible.
The following algorithm topologically sorts a dag:

>TOPOLOGICAL-SORT($$ G $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; call DFS($$ G $$) to compute finishing times $$ v.f $$ for each vertex $$ v $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; as each vertex is finished, insert it onto the front of a linked list  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; return the linked list of vertices

We can perform a topological sort in time $$ \Theta(V + E) $$, since depth-first search takes $$ \Theta(V + E) $$ time and it takes $$ O(1) $$ time to insert each of the
$$ | V | $$
vertices onto the front of the linked list.

### Lemma 22.11

A directed graph $$ G $$ is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search of $$ G $$ yields no back edges.

**Proof**  
$$ \Rightarrow $$: Suppose that a depth-first search produces a back edge $$ (u, \ v) $$.
Then vertex $$ v $$ is an ancestor of vertex $$ u $$ in the depth-first forest.
Thus, $$ G $$ contains a path from $$ v $$ to $$ u $$, and the back edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ completes a cycle.  
$$ \Leftarrow $$: Suppose that $$ G $$ contains a cycle $$ c $$.
Let $$ v $$ be the first vertex to be discovered in $$ c $$, and let $$ (u, \ v) $$ be the preceding edge in $$ c $$.
At time $$ v.d $$, the vertices of $$ c $$ form a path of white vertices from $$ v $$ to $$ u $$.
By the white-path theorem, vertex $$ u $$ becomes a descendant of $$ v $$ in the depth-first forest.
Therefore, $$ (u, \ v) $$ is a back edge. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Theorem 22.12 (Correctness of topological sort)

TOPOLOGICAL-SORT produces a topological sort of the directed acyclic graph provided as its input.

**Proof**  
Suppose that DFS is run on a given dag $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ to determine finishing times for its vertices.
Consider any edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ explored by DFS($$ G $$).
When this edge is explored, $$ v $$ cannot be gray, since then $$ v $$ would be an ancestor of $$ u $$ and $$ (u, \ v) $$ would be a back edge, contradicting Lemma 22.11.
Therefore, $$ v $$ must be either white or black.
If $$ v $$ is white, it becomes a descendant of $$ u $$, and so $$ v.f < u.f $$.
If $$ v $$ is black, it has already been finished, so that $$ v.f $$ has already been set and $$ v.f < u.f $$.
Thus, for any edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ in the dag, we have $$ v.f < u.f $$, proving the theorem. $$ \blacksquare $$

## 22.5 Strongly connected components

A strongly connected component of a directed graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$ is a maximal set of vertices $$ C \subseteq V $$ such that for every pair of vertices $$ u $$ and $$ v $$ in $$ C $$, we have both $$ u \rightsquigarrow v $$ and $$ v \rightsquigarrow u $$; that is, vertices $$ u $$ and $$ v $$ are reachable from each other.
To find strongly connected components of a graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$, we use the transpose of $$ G $$, which is defined as $$ G^\text{T} = \left( V, \ E^\text{T} \right) $$, where $$ E^\text{T} = \{ (u, \ v) : (v, \ u) \in E \} $$.
Given an adjacency-list representation of $$ G $$, the time to create $$ G^\text{T} $$ is $$ O(V + E) $$.
Observe that $$ G $$ and $$ G^\text{T} $$ have the same strongly connected components: $$ u $$ and $$ v $$ are reachable from each other in $$ G $$ if and only if they are reachable from each other in $$ G^\text{T} $$.

>STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS($$ G $$)  
>&nbsp;1&nbsp; call DFS($$ G $$) to compute finishing times $$ u.f $$ for each vertex $$ u $$  
>&nbsp;2&nbsp; compute $$ G^\text{T} $$  
>&nbsp;3&nbsp; call DFS$$ \left( G^\text{T} \right) $$, but in the main loop of DFS, consider the vertices in order of decreasing $$ u.f $$  
>&nbsp;4&nbsp; output the vertices of each tree in the depth-first forest formed in line 3 as a separate strongly connected component

The idea behind this algorithm comes from a key property of the component graph $$ G^\text{SCC} = \left( V^\text{SCC}, \ E^\text{SCC} \right) $$, which we define as follows.
Suppose that $$ G $$ has strongly connected components $$ C_1, \ C_2, \dots, \ C_k $$.
The vertex set $$ V^\text{SCC} $$ is $$ \{ v_1, \ v_2, \dots, \ v_k \} $$, and it contains a vertex $$ v_i $$ for each strongly connected component $$ C_i $$ of $$ G $$.
There is an edge $$ (v_i, \ v_j) \in E^\text{SCC} $$ if $$ G $$ contains a directed edge $$ (x, \ y) $$ for some $$ x \in C_i $$ and for some $$ y \in C_j $$.
Looked at another way, by contracting all edges whose incident vertices are within the same strongly connected component of $$ G $$, the resulting graph is $$ G^\text{SCC} $$.

### Lemma 22.13

Let $$ C $$ and $$ C' $$ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$, let $$ u, \ v \in C $$, let $$ u', \ v' \in C' $$, and suppose that $$ G $$ contains a path $$ u \rightsquigarrow u' $$.
Then $$ G $$ cannot also contain a path $$ v' \rightsquigarrow v $$.
In other words, the component graph is a dag.

**Proof**  
If $$ G $$ contains a path $$ v' \rightsquigarrow v $$, then it contains paths $$ u \rightsquigarrow u' \rightsquigarrow v' $$ and $$ v' \rightsquigarrow v \rightsquigarrow u $$.
Thus, $$ u $$ and $$ v' $$ are reachable from each other, thereby contradicting the assumption that $$ C $$ and $$ C' $$ are distinct strongly connected components. $$ \blacksquare $$

Consider vertices in the second depth-first search in decreasing order of the finishing times that were computed in the first depth-first search.
Then we visit the vertices of the component graph in topologically sorted order.

Because the STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure performs two depth-first searches, there is an ambiguity when we discuss $$ u.d $$ or $$ u.f $$.
In this section, these values always refer to the discovery and finishing times as computed by the first call of DFS, in line 1.  
We extend the notation for discovery and finishing times to sets of vertices.
If $$ U \subseteq V $$, then we define $$ d(U) = \min_{u \in U} \{ u.d \} $$ and $$ f(U) = \max_{u \in U} \{ u.f \} $$.
That is, $$ d(U) $$ and $$ f(U) $$ are the earliest discovery time and latest finishing time, respectively, of any vertex in $$ U $$.

### Lemma 22.14

Let $$ C $$ and $$ C' $$ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$.
Suppose that there is an edge $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$, where $$ u \in C $$ and $$ v \in C' $$.
Then $$ f(C) > f(C') $$.

**Proof**  
If $$ d(C) < d(C') $$, let $$ x $$ be the first vertex discovered in $$ C $$.
At time $$ x.d $$, all vertices in $$ C $$ and $$ C' $$ are white.
At that time, $$ G $$ contains a path from $$ x $$ to each vertex in $$ C $$ consisting only of white vertices.
Because $$ (u, \ v) \in E $$, for any vertex $$ w \in C' $$, there is also a path in $$ G $$ at time $$ x.d $$ from $$ x $$ to $$ w $$ consisting only of white vertices: $$ x \rightsquigarrow u \rightarrow v \rightsquigarrow w $$.
By the white-path theorem, all vertices in $$ C $$ and $$ C' $$ become descendants of $$ x $$ in the depth-first tree.
By Corollary 22.8, $$ x $$ has the latest finishing time of any of its descendants, and so $$ x.f = f(C) > f(C') $$.  
If $$ d(C) > d(C') $$, let $$ y $$ be the first vertex discovered in $$ C' $$.
At time $$ y.d $$, all vertices in $$ C' $$ are white and $$ G $$ contains a path from $$ y $$ to each vertex in $$ C' $$ consisting only of white vertices.
By the white-path theorem, all vertices in $$ C' $$ become descendants of $$ y $$ in the depth-first tree, and by Corollary 22.8, $$ y.f = f(C') $$.
At time $$ y.d $$, all vertices in $$ C $$ are white.
Since there is an edge $$ (u, \ v) $$ from $$ C $$ to $$ C' $$, Lemma 22.13 implies that there cannot be a path from $$ C' $$ to $$ C $$.
Hence, no vertex in $$ C $$ is reachable from $$ y $$.
At time $$ v.f $$, therefore, all vertices in $$ C $$ are still white.
Thus, for any vertex $$ w \in C $$, we have $$ w.f > y.f $$, which implies that $$ f(C) > f(C') $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

### Corollary 22.15

Let $$ C $$ and $$ C' $$ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph $$ G = (V, \ E) $$.
Suppose that there is an edge $$ (u, \ v) \in E^\text{T} $$, where $$ u \in C $$ and $$ v \in C' $$.
Then $$ f(C) < f(C') $$.

**Proof**  
Since $$ (u, \ v) \in E^\text{T} $$, we have $$ (v, \ u) \in E $$.
Because the strongly connected components of $$ G $$ and $$ G^\text{T} $$ are the same, Lemma 22.14 implies that $$ f(C) < f(C') $$. $$ \blacksquare $$

Corollary 22.15 provides the key to understanding why the strongly connected components algorithm works.
Let us examine what happens when we perform the second depth-first search, which is on $$ G^\text{T} $$.
We start with the strongly connected component $$ C $$ whose finishing time $$ f(C) $$ is maximum.
The search starts from some vertex $$ x \in C $$, and it visits all vertices in $$ C $$.
By Corollary 22.15, $$ G^\text{T} $$ contains no edges from $$ C $$ to any other strongly connected component, and so the search from $$ x $$ will not visit vertices in any other component.
Thus, the tree rooted at $$ x $$ contains exactly the vertices of $$ C $$.
Having completed visiting all vertices in $$ C $$, the search in line 3 selects as a root a vertex from some other strongly connected component $$ C' $$ whose finishing time $$ f(C') $$ is maximum over all components other than $$ C $$.
Again, the search will visit all vertices in $$ C' $$, but by Corollary 22.15, the only edges in $$ G^\text{T} $$ from $$ C' $$ to any other component must be to $$ C $$, which we have already visited.
In general, when the depth-first search of $$ G^\text{T} $$ in line 3 visits any strongly connected component, any edges out of that component must be to components that the search already visited.
Each depth-first tree, therefore will be exactly one strongly connected component.

### Theorem 22.16

The STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure correctly computes the strongly connected components of the directed graph $$ G $$ provided as its input.

**Proof**  
The inductive hypothesis is that the first $$ k $$ trees produced in line 3 are strongly connected components.
The basis for the induction, when $$ k = 0 $$, is trivial.
In the inductive step, we consider $$ (k + 1) $$st tree produced.
Let the root of this tree be vertex $$ u $$, and let $$ u $$ be in strongly connected component $$ C $$.
Because of how we choose roots in the depth-first search in line 3, $$ u.f = f(C) > f(C') $$ for any strongly connected components $$ C' $$ other than $$ C $$ has yet to be visited.
By the inductive hypothesis, at the time that the search visits $$ u $$, all other vertices of $$ C $$ are white.
By the white-path theorem, therefore, all other vertices of $$ C $$ are descendants of $$ u $$ in its depth-first tree.
Moreover, by the inductive hypothesis and by Corollary 22.15, any edges in $$ G^\text{T} $$ that leave $$ C $$ must be to strongly connected components that have already been visited.
Thus, no vertex in any strongly connected component other than $$ C $$ will be a descendant of $$ u $$ during the depth-first search of $$ G^\text{T} $$.
Therefore, the vertices of the depth-first tree in $$ G^\text{T} $$ that is rooted at $$ u $$ form exactly one strongly connected component. $$ \blacksquare $$

---

Sources:
- [Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., & Stein, C. (2009). Introduction to Algorithms (3rd ed.). MIT Press.](https://a.co/d/62TQVO9)