---
title: 4. Divide-and-Conquer
# description: Short summary of the post
date: 2024-12-05 16:23
categories: [Computer Science, Algorithm]
tags: [divide-and-conquer]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
math: true
pin: false
---

In the divide-and-conquer paradigm, we typically solve a problem recursively, applying three steps at each level of the recursion:

1. Divide the problem into a number of subproblems that are smaller instances of the same problem.
2. Conquer the subproblems by solving them recursively, unless the subproblem sizes are small enough.
3. Combine the solutions to the subproblems into the solution for the original problem.

### Recurrences

A recurrence is an equation or inequality that describes a function in terms of its value on smaller inputs.
This chapter offers three methods for solving recurrences:

- Substitution method: we guess a bound and then use mathematical induction to prove our guess correct.
- Recursion-tree method: it converts the recurrence into a tree whose nodes represent the costs incurred at various levels of the recursion.
- Master method: it provides bounds for recurrences of the form

$$
\begin{align*}
    T(n) = a T(n/b) + f(n)
\end{align*}
\label{eq:1}
\tag{4.1}
$$

<p class="indented-paragraph">
where $$ a \ge 1 $$, $$ b > 1 $$, and $$ f(n) $$ is a given function.
A recurrence of the form in equation \eqref{eq:1} characterizes a divide-and-conquer algorithm that creates $$ a $$ subproblems, each of which is $$ 1/b $$ the size of the original problem, and in which the divide and combine steps together take $$ f(n) $$ time.
</p>

## 4.1 The maximum-subarray problem

Suppose that you have been offered the opportunity to invest in a company.
The stock price of the company is volatile.
You are allowed to buy one unit of stock only one time and then sell it at a later date.
Also, you are allowed to learn what the price of the stock will be in the future.
Your goal is to maximize your profit.

### A brute-force solution

We can easily devise a brute-force solution to this problem: just try every possible pair of buy and sell dates in which the buy date precedes the sell date.
A period of $$ n $$ days has $$ \binom{n}{2} $$ such pairs of dates.
Since $$ \binom{n}{2} $$ is $$ \Theta(n^2) $$, and it requires a constant time to evaluate each pair of dates, this approach takes $$ \Omega(n^2) $$ time.

### Maximum subarray

Instead of looking at the daily prices, consider the daily change in price, where the change on day $$ i $$ is the difference between the prices after day $$ i - 1 $$ and after day $$ i $$.
If we treat the sequence of the daily change in price as an array $$ A $$, we now want to find the nonempty, contiguous subarray of $$ A $$ whose values have the largest sum.
We call this contiguous subarray the maximum subarray.

### A solution using divide-and-conquer

Suppose we want to find a maximum subarray of the subarray $$ A[low..high] $$.
Divide-and-conquer suggests that we divide the subarray into two subarrays of as equal size as possible.
That is, we find the midpoint, say $$ mid $$, of the subarray, and consider the subarrays $$ A[low..mid] $$ and $$ A[mid + 1..high] $$.
Then, any contiguous subarray $$ A[i..j] $$ of $$ A[low..high] $$ must lie in exactly one of the following places:

- entirely in the subarray $$ A[low..mid] $$, so that $$ low \le i \le j \le mid $$.
- entirely in the subarray $$ A[mid + 1..high] $$, so that $$ mid < i \le j \le high $$, or
- crossing the midpoint, so that $$ low \le i \le mid < j \le high $$.

Therefore, a maximum subarray of $$ A[low..high] $$ must lie in exactly one of these places.
In fact, a maximum subarray of $$ A[low..high] $$ must have the greatest sum over all subarrays entirely in $$ A[low..mid] $$, entirely in $$ A[mid + 1..high] $$, or crossing the midpoint.
We can find maximum subarrays of $$ A[low..mid] $$ and $$ A[mid + 1..high] $$ recursively, because these two subproblems are smaller instances of the problem of finding a maximum subarray.
Thus, all that is left to do is find a maximum subarray that crosses the midpoint, and take a subarray with the largest sum of the three.

We can find a maximum subarray crossing the midpoint in time linear in the size of the subarray $$ A[low..high] $$.
This problem is not a smaller instance of our original problem, because it has the added restriction that the subarray it chooses must cross the midpoint.
Any subarray crossing the midpoint is itself made of two subarrays $$ A[i..mid] $$ and $$ A[mid + 1..j] $$, where $$ low \le i \le mid $$ and $$ mid < j \le high $$.
Therefore, we just need to find maximum subarrays of the form $$ A[i..mid] $$ and $$ A[mid + 1..j] $$ and then combine them.

>FIND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY($$ A, \ low, \ mid, \ high $$)  
>01&nbsp; $$ left\text{-}sum = -\infty $$  
>02&nbsp; $$ sum = 0 $$  
>03&nbsp; for $$ i = mid $$ downto $$ low $$  
>04&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ sum = sum + A[i] $$  
>05&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ sum > left\text{-}sum $$  
>06&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ left\text{-}sum = sum $$  
>07&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ max\text{-}left = i $$  
>08&nbsp; $$ right\text{-}sum = -\infty $$  
>09&nbsp; $$ sum = 0 $$  
>10&nbsp; for $$ j = mid + 1 $$ to $$ high $$  
>11&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ sum = sum + A[j] $$  
>12&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ sum > right\text{-}sum $$  
>13&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ right\text{-}sum = sum $$  
>14&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ max\text{-}right = j $$  
>15&nbsp; return ($$ max\text{-}left, \ max\text{-}right, \ left\text{-}sum + right\text{-}sum $$)

This procedure works as follows.
Lines 1–7 find a maximum subarray of the left half, $$ A[low..mid] $$.
Since this subarray must contain $$ A[mid] $$, the for loop of lines 3–7 starts the index $$ i $$ at $$ mid $$ and works down to $$ low $$, so that every subarray it considers is of the form $$ A[i..mid] $$.
Whenever we find, in line 5, a subarray $$ A[i..mid] $$ with a sum of values greater than $$ left\text{-}sum $$, we update $$ left\text{-}sum $$ to this subarray's sum in line 6, and update the variable $$ max\text{-}left $$ to record this index $$ i $$ in line 7.
Lines 8–14 work analogously for the right half, $$ A[mid + 1..high] $$.
Here, the for loop of lines 10–14 considers every subarray in the form $$ A[mid + 1..j] $$.
Finally, line 15 returns the indices $$ max\text{-}left $$ and $$ max\text{-}right $$ that demarcate a maximum subarray crossing the midpoint, along with the sum $$ left\text{-}sum + right\text{-}sum $$ of the values in the subarray $$ A[max\text{-}left..max\text{-}right] $$.

If the subarray $$ A[low..high] $$ contains $$ n $$ entries (so that $$ n = high - low + 1 $$), the call FIND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY($$ A, \ low, \ mid, \ high $$) takes $$ \Theta(n) $$ time.
Since each iteration of each of the two for loops takes $$ \Theta(1) $$ time, we just need to count up how many iterations there are altogether.
The for loop of lines 3–7 makes $$ mid - low + 1 $$ iterations, and the for loop of lines 10–14 makes $$ high - mid $$ iterations, and so the total number of iterations is

$$
\begin{align*}
    (mid - low + 1) + (high - mid) &= high - low + 1 \\
                                   &= n
\end{align*}
$$

>FIND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY($$ A, \ low, \ high $$)  
>01&nbsp; if $$ high == low $$  
>02&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;return ($$low, \ high, \ A[low] $$)    
>03&nbsp; else $$ mid = \lfloor (low + high) / 2 \rfloor $$  
>04&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ (left\text{-}low, \ left\text{-}high, \ left\text{-}sum) = $$ FIND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY($$ A, \ low, \ mid $$)  
>05&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ (right\text{-}low, \ right\text{-}high, \ right\text{-}sum) = $$ FIND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY($$ A, \ mid + 1, \ high $$)  
>06&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;$$ (cross\text{-}low, \ cross\text{-}high, \ cross\text{-}sum) = $$ FIND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY($$ A, \ low, \ mid, \ high $$)  
>07&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if $$ left\text{-}sum \ge right\text{-}sum $$ and $$ left\text{-}sum \ge cross\text{-}sum $$  
>08&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;return ($$ left\text{-}low, \ left\text{-}high, \ left\text{-}sum $$)  
>09&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;elseif $$ right\text{-}sum \ge left\text{-}sum $$ and $$ right\text{-}sum \ge cross\text{-}sum $$  
>10&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;return ($$ right\text{-}low, \ right\text{-}high, \ right\text{-}sum $$)  
>11&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;else return ($$ cross\text{-}low, \ cross\text{-}high, \ cross\text{-}sum $$)