---
title: 12. Binary Search Trees
# description: Short summary of the post
date: 2024-12-12 21:27
categories: [Computer Science, Algorithm]
tags: [binary-search-tree]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
math: true
pin: false
---

The search tree data structure supports many dynamic-set operations, including SEARCH, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, PREDECESSOR, SUCCESSOR, INSERT, and DELETE.
We can use a search tree both as a dictionary and as a priority queue.  
Basic operations on a binary search tree take time proportional to the height of the tree.
For a complete binary tree with $$ n $$ nodes, such operations run in $$ \Theta(\lg n) $$ worst-case time.
If the tree is a linear chain of $$ n $$ nodes, however, the same operations run in $$ \Theta(\lg n) $$ worst-case time.
Since the expected height of a randomly built binary search tree is $$ O(\lg n) $$, so that basic dynamic-set operations on such a tree take $$ \Theta(\lg n) $$ time on average.

## 12.1 What is a binary search tree?

A binary search tree is organized, as the name suggests, in a binary tree.
We can represent such a tree by a linked data structure in which each node is an object.
In addition to a key and satellite data, each node contains attributes $$ left $$, $$ right $$, and $$ p $$ that point to the nodes corresponding to its left child, its right child, and its parent, respectively.  
The keys in a binary search tree are always stored in such a way as to satisfy the binary-search-tree property:

>Let $$ x $$ be a node in a binary search tree.
>If $$ y $$ is a node in the left subtree of $$ x $$, then $$ y.key \le x.key $$.
>If $$ y $$ is a node in the right subtree of $$ x $$, then $$ y.key \ge x.key $$.

The binary-search-tree property allows us to print out all the keys in a binary search tree in sorted order by a simple recursive algorithm, called an inorder tree walk.
This algorithm prints the key of the root of a subtree between printing the values in its left subtree and printing those in its right subtree.
Similarly, a preorder tree walk prints the root before the values in either subtree, and a postorder tree walk prints the root after the values in its subtrees.

>INORDER-TREE-WALK($$ x $$) \\
>01&nbsp; if $$ x \neq $$ NIL  
>02&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INORDER-TREE-WALK($$ x.left $$)  
>03&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;print $$ x.key $$  
>04&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INORDER-TREE-WALK($$ x.right $$)  

The correctness of the algorithm follows by induction directly from the binary-search-tree property.
It takes $$ \Theta(n) $$ time to walk an $$ n $$-node binary search tree, since after the initial call, the procedure calls itself recursively exactly twice for each node in the tree—once for its left child and once for its right child.

### Theorem 12.1

If $$ x $$ is the root of an $$ n $$-node subtree, then the call INORDER-TREE-WALK($$ x $$) takes $$ \Theta(n) $$ time.

**Proof**  
Let $$ T(n) $$ denote the time taken by INORDER-TREE-WALK when it is called on the root of an $$ n $$-node subtree.
