---
title: 21. Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
# description: Short summary of the post
date: 2024-12-21 15:35
categories: [Computer Science, Algorithm]
tags: [disjoint-set, union-by-rank, path-compression]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
math: true
pin: false
---

## 21.1 Disjoint-set operations

A disjoint-set data structure maintains a collection $$ \mathcal{S} = \{ S_1, \ S_2, \dots, S_k \} $$ of disjoint dynamic sets.
We identify each set by a representative, which is some member of the set.
Each element of a set is represented by an object.
Letting $$ x $$ denote an object, we wish to support the following operations:
- MAKE-SET($$ x $$) creates a new set whose only member (and thus representative) is $$ x $$.
Since the sets are disjoint, we require that $$ x $$ not already be in some other set.
- UNION($$ x, \ y $$) unites the dynamic sets that contain $$ x $$ and $$ y $$, say $$ S_x $$ and $$ S_y $$, into a new set that is the union of these two sets.
- FIND-SET($$ x $$) returns a pointer to the representative of the unique set containing $$ x $$.

Throughout this chapter, we shall analyze the running times of disjoint-set data structures in terms of two parameters: $$ n $$, the number of MAKE-SET operations, and $$ m $$, the total number of MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET operations.

### An application of disjoint-set data structures

One of the many applications of disjoint-set data structures arises in determining the connected components of an undirected graph.

>CONNECTED-COMPONENTS($$ G $$)  
>01&nbsp; for each vertex $$ v \in G.V $$  
>02&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;MAKE-SET($$ v $$)  
>03&nbsp; for each edge $$ (u, \ v) \in G.E $$  
>04&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if FIND-SET($$ u $$) $$ \neq $$ FIND-SET($$ v $$)  
>05&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;UNION($$ u, \ v $$)

>SAME-COMPONENT($$ u, \ v $$)  
>01&nbsp; if FIND-SET($$ u $$) $$ == $$ FIND-SET($$ v $$)  
>02&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;return TRUE  
>03&nbsp; else return FALSE

The procedure CONNECTED-COMPONENTS initially places each vertex $$ v $$ in its own set.
Then, for each edge $$ (u, \ v) $$, it unites the sets containing $$ u $$ and $$ v $$.
After processing all the edges, two vertices are in the same connected component if and only if the corresponding objects are in the same set.
Thus, CONNECTED-COMPONENTS computes sets in such a way that the procedure SAME-COMPONENT can determine whether two vertices are in the same connected component.

## 21.2 Linked-list representation of disjoint sets

